Hi.
And welcome back.
So here we're just going to continue our discussion on the while loop, and in particular we're going
to look at what happens with break and continue when we are inside a try statement, inside a loop.
And so the question is what happens? Now if you remember we've the  try,  we have try.
Then we have an  except  clause that will run when there's an exception, and we can trap specific exceptions.
But there's also this  finally  clause that exists in the try.
And this finally clause always runs, even when there's an exception.
So whether there is an exception or not, finally always runs.
So let's just check that out very quickly just as a refresher.
Let's say it would take a equals 10, b equals 1 and we're going to try dividing A by B.
Are we to say try a by b, and then we're going to catch a zero division error.
So we'll trap that error and we'll just print 'division by zero'.
And we're also going to put in a finally,  and finally under the say: print 'this always executes' OK.
So when we run this code (Well) there was no exception because B was equal to 1 but we still ran the.
This always executes.
So we see that output right here.
Now if we change B to zero then we get the division by zero
trap that occurred here.
Right.
So we caught that error and we printed out division by zero.
And then the finally also ran as well.
So you could see finally always runs.
But now we might get into the following situation, and let's do a little example.
So let's start again with a equal to zero.
And let's to another variable b equal to - what I'm going to do is I'm going to increment and decrement
be at the same time and do an A divided by B.
So if I do this correctly at some point I'm going to hit that division by zero when it reaches to B
is going to reach zero, and we're going to get a division by zero error.
So I'm going to do that inside a while loop, so we don't want to run the while loop for too much, just enough
to get to the error.
And one more, so let's do A less than three. In fact I'll do A less than four.
Just to be sure.
And then we'll print.
First thing I'm going to do is just print some dashes out just to indicate the beginning of the loop
so we can keep things kind of neatly separated as we're printing. And we'll set A equal to plus A plus
one right away, incrementing A by 1 and we're going to decrement A (ah) B by 1 as well.
So basically at some point B is going to become 0. And then we're going to do our try.
So let's go ahead and do a try and we're going to say results equals -
Actually we don't even need result, just try A divided by B.
Not going to store that anyway, and we'll do except
a zero division error.
And when we have a division error, we're going to print out the two numbers that are causing the problem.
And we'll say that this is the division by zero.
And then we'll just format A comma B.
So we'll see what's causing the problem there.
And, what we're going to do now, is we're going to say  continue.
So if we get a division, if we run the exception, let's do it continue.
Let's just go ahead and do that and let's see what happens.
So in this case I'm quitting early.
Finally the continue inside the except call but you could put inside the try as
well, it doesn't matter.
But finally will still run.
And let's go ahead and print the finally.
So we'll do print (ah) let's print the values out again, and let's just say this always executes OK.
So this is in there.
And we need to format it with A and B.
OK.
And then I'm going to put something in the main loop.
I'm going to put in I'm just going to do the same thing.
Basically I'm going to print out A comma B
and we'll say that this is the main loop.
So now we should be able to identify every print statement where it's coming from, and see what's going
on as this thing runs.
And that's it.
So basically we've got this wild loop where incrementing a decrementing B we try dividing A by B if
we have a zero division error we trap it.
We print out this thing and then we do continue, which will basically go back (remember) after to the beginning
of the loop and reexecute the test.
But it will not reach this point when we have continue, it will not reach this point. If we don't have
an exception, then it won't continue, and we will reach this point here.
So let's go ahead and see what happens when we run this - and of course that's not what I expected.
I've got an unexpected that, OK so I typed in something incorrectly.
I knew it was going to get an exception but I was't trapping.
that one. Stop.
Let's try it again.
OK, what am I doing wrong?
Oh I really can't type.
Can I.
All right.
Let's make sure everything else looks fine.
OK.
Now we got it.
All right.
So let's see what happened.
And (all right) I still can't type.
I'm going to leave this in the video, so you can see kind of the errors, and you know maybe how to start
debugging and understanding sometimes some of the stuff that comes back.
So here's the error.
I had my try my except ZeroDivisionError, and it tells me that I errored out on this line of code, with
ZeroDivisionError.
While that's what I'm trying to trap, why didn't it trap it?
Well the only reason would be if I'm not trapping the correct error.
And let's see what I'm trying to trap.
I'm trying to trap ZeroDivisionError but I misspelled erorr it's two Rs there and only one R there.
So I wasn't trapping the python zero division error.
That's why I actually got a ZeroDivisionError in here.
OK.
All right.
So let's try this again.
Much better.
That was supposed to execute without actually creating an exception. at runtime. So we'll see 1 comma
1, so it executed 1 comma 1.
It always executes.
That was the final (ok) and then it printed there from the main loop.
Then we started the next loop.
We have 2 comma 0.
Look what happened.
We printed out  "division by zero"  right here, so we reached that line of code, that line here reached, but
was reached by this group, was generated by this line of code.
At this point we did a continue but look what happens: 2 comma 0 still gets printed with the always executes.
So the  finally code block  actually executed, even though we have a continue here.
And that will always happen.
So if you're inside a try statement and you have a continue.
And if you have a finally, the finally will execute.
So that's great.
That means that (you know) if you need to make sure that you close a file or close a database connection
for some reason, (you know) maybe roll back a transaction or do something when the (you know) after you're
done, trying to deal with whatever it is in that particular loop iteration, then you're assured that the
finally will run, whether you had an exception or not.
We know that.
But even if you have a continue in there let's say in your exception trap, it will still run
the finally. It's not going to bail out of the loop until it has executed the finally, and then it will bail
out.
So that's really good to know.
Now this works with break as well, not just continue.
So if we take this, and now I know at least it executes correctly, all I need to do -
Let's see if I can spell this - break.
OK.
Then of course what's going to happen is that (it's) we're not going to get these iterations because we're
going to break as soon as we hit the first error.
So if we execute this, as you can see we are again, the finally executes (right) because this division
by zero error occurred and we still executed the finally and then we did the break on the statement.
Now of course you can also combine this with the else clause if you want.
Right.
So now we could say else and of course: when will the else execute?
If the break was never encountered, which means what?
We never had a division error, zero division error.
So we can just say here: print 'code executed without a zero division error'.
Right, so we know that that's the case if we reach the else clause.
So when we do that, we don't get this print statement, we don't get the string printed out.
Why?
Well we had a division by zero error.
So let's tweak this, so that we don't get division by zero error.
All I need to do - A's going to run up to 4, I'm going to make B that's equal to 10.
So it's big, it's decremented.
I know that (you know) 10 minus four isn't going to become zero.
So we run that, then you'll notice we get all these loops, and then we get code executed without a zero division
error.
So it did in fact execute that else statement.
All right.
I think that kind of sums it up for the refresher on the while loop.
So remember: the while loop, either you start and you always evaluate the conditional expression first, which
doesn't guarantee that your loop will run at least once.
You need to do that.
You can use the  while True  kind of approach.
And the while loop also has an else clause that can be attached to it, which executes if and only if
the while loop terminated normally.
i.e. without a break statement, and then the continue and break statements can be used inside a try
statement, inside a loop. And the finally will always still execute, before either breaking or continuing
from that point forward.
All right.
So thanks for watching and I'll see you in the next video.